Reviewer 2 of ICRA 2026 submission 3047

Comments to the author
======================

The authors present an approach for reliable localization
of mobile robots in Vineyards whose repetitive features
cause aliasing and degrade previous methods. They propose a
semantic-aware particle filter where semantic landmarks
(poles and trunks) are detected from images and projected
into 2D LiDAR data to create semantic scans used in the
particle filtering model. They also introduce “semantic
walls”, which are virtual solid obstacles to constrain the
observations in this map-based localization. Lastly, GPS
measurements are fused into the particle filtering for
improved efficiency and higher robustness in areas with
fewer detected landmarks.     

The text is easy to follow in general with minor mistakes. 

Although the authors presented a localization system that
showed improvements when compared to the baselines, some of
the claims regarding the “semantic walls” contribution need
more details and/or evaluation.   

Here are the major points to be addressed in the
manuscript:  

1) The authors state that the introduced “semantic walls”,
which are virtual obstacles (lines) between landmarks,
improve localization and reduce ambiguity. However, it is
unclear from the text and equations how these virtual
landmarks are fused with the local (real) observations and
actually enhance the localization. For instance, if a
particle is very close to the wall, is the real landmark
observation compared with the virtual line landmark in the
likelihood function? How does that improve/compare with the
case where only real landmarks are used on the map? These
questions should be clarified in the manuscript to support
the authors’ claims.  

2) In the experimental section, Table I shows that despite
localizing more often in the wrong row, the AMCL baseline
has comparable errors to the proposed method. However, the
authors’ method uses GPS, which constrains pose errors with
absolute observations and therefore contributes to avoiding
row switching. For a fair comparison, some of the baselines
(AMCL or RTAB-Map) should also include GPS observations.  

3) A runtime evaluation should be included in the
manuscript to inform readers about the realtime
capabilities of the method. 

 
Some minor but important points to be addressed in the
manuscript:  

4) In Figures 1 and 4, the axes labels and legends are very
small. Please increase the font size for better
visualization.	

5) In Figure 3, the caption text has a repeated period mark
at the end.	

6) In Section III.D.2, the sentence “The total
log-likelihood log Lx for particle x is a weighted sum of
normalised the semantic and GPS likelihood components”
seems to have a misplaced “the”.  

7) In Section IV.B, sentence “...all the baselines in both
APE metric computed...”, the word “metric” should be
plural.  

8) Section III.C, the first quotation mark is reversed in
”semantic walls”. 